---
layout: blog
title: Blog
permalink: /reading-blog/
---

In his chapter “The Humanities,” Willem Drees seeks to define, characterize, and contextualize the humanities by examining them from a variety of viewpoints, such as through comparative analysis with the natural sciences, exploring the framework of agents vs. actors, and more. Through this approach, Drees is able to clarify misunderstanding regarding what the humanities actually represent, and to communicate the importance and relevance of studying the humanities to a general audience. Drees contends that there is “much to be discovered about humans, others and ourselves,” and it is precisely this ideological focus on the affective significance of the humanities which drives his larger analytical approach (10).

Regarding the key ideas of this chapter, Drees begins with a distinctive clarification that “we are humans studying humans,” thus emphasizing the self-referential nature of the humanities, which he claims is one of the key distinguishing factors between the humanities and other disciplines (10). This quote also succinctly characterizes the “second-order” nature of the humanities, which is the notion that “there must be humans before there can be humanities” (13). By tying together this distinctive self-referentiality and this “second-order” characterization, Drees pits the humanities as a distinctively humanistic discipline which focuses strongly on the expressive and meaning-laden aspects of culture, art, and history.

Another key moment from the reading was when Drees mentioned how “in the humanities, the emphasis is on humans as actors, who have an inner life, whereas in the social sciences the explanatory orientation with its emphasis on models, statistics, and aspirations of objectivity, tends to take the first place” (22). This quote in particular highlights how understanding human behavior and elucidating the impact of such actions, rather than seeking explanatory models, is a critical focus of the humanities. Furthermore, the direct comparison with the social sciences, a discipline that is traditionally associated closely with the humanities, serves to emphasize the differences between these two related, yet distinct, fields of study.

After finishing this chapter, a few key questions immediately came to mind. Namely, after reading the section on page 25 which highlights several different scholarly works that aim to communicate the importance of the humanities, I found myself wondering about how we can truly hope to define or understand the humanities (or any similarly broad concept, for that matter) if so many different definitions exist for the same term? Furthermore, if the humanities are so highly focused on hermeneutical approaches, how do they effectively blend such humanistic ideologies with technical/statistical/computational procedures like those found in the digital humanities?

