---
layout: post
title:  "\"The Measured Words: How Computers Analyze Text\" by Geoffrey Rockwell and Stefan Sinclair"
date:   2022-10-24 01:52:00 -0400
categories: jekyll update
---

While "The Measured Words: How Computers Analyze Text" by Geoffrey Rockwell and Stéfan Sinclair investigates many of the key technical details behind textual data representations, the key point of their work delves deeper than this surface-level exploration of computational techniques for analyzing textual data. Rather, Rockwell and Sinclair introduce the profound argument that computers are not “hermeneutical” in the sense that they are not, at the present moment, intelligent enough to actually *understand* textual data. Even advanced methodologies like machine learning techniques are still, at the highest level, a set of complex instructions that allow for computers to mimic the interpretive power of human analysis. This point was best emphasized in the introduction of John Searle’s “Chinese Room” thought experiment, which highlights how a human that doesn’t know Chinese can be given a detailed procedure (in English) which, at face value, allows them to convince outsiders that they do, in fact, know Chinese.

To drive this point home, Rockwell and Sinclair also point to several technical details that are crucial to understanding how computers interpret text. The concepts of strings are introduced, and emphasis is placed on quantitative methods of analyzing textual bodies (word frequency graphs, Key Word In Context, concording, etc.). By presenting numerous examples elucidating how digital humanists often approach analyzing textual data (especially through the use of Voyant Tools), Rockwell and Sinclair are able to further emphasize the purely algorithmic nature of digital approaches to textual analysis. As such, the fundamental idea that the hermeneutical nature of computers and humans are distinctly separate is reinforced.

Some questions that this reading inspired were related to the fundamental assumptions made about the nature of true intelligence and hermeneutics. Could one not argue, for the same reasons presented by Rockwell and Sinclair, that humans are also simply following “algorithms” of their own, albeit at a much granular and complex level? Where and how do we draw the line between simple instruction processing and free thought? If computers are able to mimic the hermeneutical capabilities of humans to a degree at which the computer’s output becomes indistinguishable from that of humans, have we achieved artificial sentience? While Rockwell and Sinclair perhaps would respond negatively to this final question, the semantics of this discussion regarding the difference between humans and computers will certainly continue to evolve as the hermeneutical power of computers increases. 
