---
layout: post
title:  "Week 1: \"The Digital Humanities: A Primer for Students and Scholars\" by Eileen Gardiner and Ronald Musto"
date:   2022-09-14 16:32:00 -0400
---

Eileen Gardiner and Ronald Musto’s chapter introducing the digital humanities raises several important and thought-provoking questions regarding the role of technology in humanist-centric work. Most critically, they ask whether computational methods principally serve as a means to an end for answering humanist questions, or whether these methods are fundamentally changing the way humanities research and literature is produced. In doing so, they necessarily investigate the historical foundations of the humanities, tracing back to the early Middle Ages all the way to the post-WWII era. Ironically, one particularly salient comment the authors mentioned was that the highly practical approach to educating the Italian business classes in the later Middle Ages most closely imitates the current state of corporate universities, perhaps indicating that the digital humanities are simply echoing past approaches to engaging with the humanities.

In terms of further questions regarding this reading, I found myself wondering whether other technological (though not necessarily digital) developments in the past been applied successfully to the humanities? And, if so, what were the consequences of embracing these tools? These two questions succinctly encapsulate much of the dilemma of whether or not to embrace digital tools in the humanities. If it so happens to be the case that past embraces of technology did not substantially impact the larger goals of humanist work, then it could reassure that these newfound digital techniques are nothing more than the latest tools in the humanist’s kit. However, if past embraces were found to have substantial consequences, perhaps it would be wise to engage with digital tools through a skeptical framework.

The second chapter, “The Organization of Humanities Research” emphasizes that digital tools have substantially impacted the methodological approaches taken in humanistic research. The authors contend that while digital tools provide substantial benefits (ease of access, efficiency of analysis, improved data collection/aggregation), there are also some considerable consequences (temptation of reaching conclusions to quickly, lack of full understanding from humanists, lack of adequate interpretation/analysis). A key question consistently addressed throughout this chapter is how we can better understand the impact of digital tools on the humanities so that we may more consciously move forward with these tools without undermining the original goals and intentions of the humanities. Furthermore, the authors point to specific instances across the procedural pipeline to humanities research where digital tools have both helped and hindered humanists, thus showing that this discussion is far more nuanced than surface-level analyses may claim.
