---
layout: post
title:  "\"Sacred Reading: From Augustine to the Digital Humanists\" by Chad Wellmon"
date:   2022-10-19 18:34:00 -0400
categories: jekyll update
---

Chad Wellmon’s eloquent summarization of the key ontological paradigms regarding the significance of what it means to “read” a text begins with a rather neutral synopsis of contemporary perspectives on the recent rise in popularity of “distant reading,” a term encompassing the use of technological methods to analyze and extract semantic meaning from large textual corpuses. Following this synopsis, Wellmon poses a philosophical question regarding the historical context of the term “reading” itself, asking where the notion of reading as a transformative experience originally came from.

To this end, Wellmon begins by investigating the Augustinian perspective on reading, which purports that “words are a divine gift given to all in common” and that “[t]he first step … is a ‘fear of God,’ which should prompt reflections on human finitude and mortality” (3, 4). Following this analysis, Wellmon follows the transformation of reading as a highly personal, almost divine experience to one of a mechanistic tool aimed to extract meaning from texts, which were considered plainly to be material objects. This chronological structure reveals the key goal of Wellmon’s essay: he aims to communicate how the very understanding of what it means to “read” something has shifted over time, perhaps implying that it is not so egregious to accept distant reading as a natural next step in the meaning of the word.

Another key point of Wellmon’s regards the nature of the significance of distant reading: the beauty lies not in the “reading” process itself, but rather in the ability to recognize and discover meaningful patterns embedded within “apparent miscellany” (7). Adopting this perspective certainly contradicts the perspective of critics of distant reading, who would claim that distant reading inherently reduces the experience of reading to one devoid of emotional fulfillment or attachment. While that may be the case, Wellmon argues that the emotional fulfillment is simply transferred from the actual reading process itself to the end results achieved through distant reading, and thus should be given the same respect as more traditional forms of reading.

For me personally, reading Wellmon’s essay immediately caused me to ask questions regarding the true importance of historical interpretations of “reading” during the time periods in which such definitions were first introduced. How can we be certain, for example, that the Augustinian interpretation of reading was well-supported at the time, and not biased towards the opinions of an arbitrary scholar? Without presenting convincing historical evidence that exonerates each viewpoint on reading, it is difficult to convince the casual reader unfamiliar with the historical landscape surrounding the term “reading” that such viewpoints are representative of dominant perspectives. Furthermore, with both critics and proponents currently arguing over the place of “distant reading” within the broader context of “reading,” how can we reach any meaningful conclusion about the nature of “reading”? Questions like these immediately are followed with a deeper philosophical question regarding the inherent ambiguity in attempting to characterize a concept like reading, and speak to the depths of the perspectives on both sides of the modern debate regarding distant reading. 
