---
layout: post
title:  "\"The Collaborative Musical Text\" by Richard Freedman, Raffaele Viglianti, and Adam Crandell"
date:   2022-11-21 17:34:00 -0400
categories: jekyll update
---

At first glance, Freedman, Viglianti, and Crandell’s article might appear to provide an exclusively optimistic outlook on the impact of digital technology on projects related to musical scholarship. Indeed, the authors frequently paint technological advancement in a positive light, such as when they wrote that “new technology is transforming scholarship,” or that “[d]igital resources will enhance printed ones” (164). However, their analysis is not entirely one-sided: by thoroughly analyzing the technical details, collaborative efforts, and digital resources necessary to realize some of the most influential digital music projects in recent years, they reveal underlying tradeoffs and dilemmas, such as the inevitable problem of balancing innovation and sustainability. Certainly, while it would appear that the authors embrace the newfound capabilities and connections that can be made through the effective utilization of technology, they acknowledge that the debate is highly nuanced through specific examples.

Another important message that is repeated consistently throughout the article is the nature of collaborative efforts in the digital music space. The authors centrally claim that “digital work is best done not for someone, but with them,” and that “it is best to think about digital work as partnerships” (154). This perspective highlights one of the key advantages of embracing digital work: for the authors, when such work is supported collaboratively, scholarly contributions are considerably enhanced. This notion of supporting collaboration through the use of digital tools is central to many of the musical projects explored in depth by the authors.

Regarding specific questions raised by reading this article, I found myself particularly interested in the history of music projects, and how the current use of digital tools has influenced such projects. Such an analysis would provide a clear position either in favor or against the influx of digital tools in musical disciplines, which is sorely missing in this article. I also was curious about the types of scholars engaging in the specific digital music projects presented in this article: would the majority of them consider themselves to be “digital humanists”? If so, do they perform most of the technical work themselves, or is there still a distinction between the pure humanists and technologists? Questions like these would help reveal the nature of the meaning of the term “digital humanities” within this particular sub-context, which could prove to be useful in understanding the term in broader contexts.
