---
layout: post
title:  "Week 3: \"An Overview of The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.\" by J. G. A. Pocock"
date:   2022-09-23 17:34:00 -0400
categories: jekyll update
---

J.G.A. Pocock’s analysis of Edward Gibbon’s The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire highlights some key structural inconsistencies in Gibbon’s work, perhaps pointing to his broader analysis as a contemporary critique of this important historical work. For example, Pocock points to Gibbon’s sixth volume as a marker of such organizational oddities: the final three chapters have little to do with the rest of the volume, which Pocock claims “may not sufficiently recognize the absorbing interest in oriental and Eurasian history which long precede the visit to Rome” (38).

Pocock also criticizes Gibbon’s approach to analyzing the eastern Roman empire, Byzantium, and its successors. Regarding Gibbon’s analysis of the Ottoman Turks and the Slavs, which largely is an analysis of eastern European cultures in a post-Byzantium world (following the fall of Constantinople in 1453), Pocock claims that Gibbon’s approach is not systematically sound (36). In support of this point, he comments on the fact that Gibbon did not feel a need to supply a medieval, nor an early-modern, analysis of east Roman historiography at the same scale of its western counterpart (37). This notion is consonant with broader views on Gibbon’s work (as evidenced in the Wikipedia page summarizing his work), which points to his harsh criticism of the Quran and other Islamic focal points.

Pocock’s analysis in this chapter, however, is not entirely one-sided towards a critical perspective. He does acknowledge some of the key intellectual moves that Gibbon makes, like focusing on the “triumph of barbarism and religion” as a critical (and succinct) explanation for the key causes of the downfall of the western Roman empire (22). In following previously established sentiments regarding Gibbon’s later narratives about eastern Rome, it would appear that Pocock views Gibbon’s earlier work as more logically and organizationally sound. Such a perspective perhaps implies that Pocock was hoping that Gibbon would take similar approaches in his analyses of both Rome and Byzantium, but was disappointed to find that the later volumes lacked the same consistency which made the earlier volumes so compelling.
