---
layout: post
title:  "\"Technology Is Taking Over English Departments\" by Adam Kirsch"
date:   2022-10-19 17:34:00 -0400
categories: jekyll update
---

Adam Kirsch’s skeptical critique of the increasing embrace of technological developments in the humanities is central to his argument. For instance, Kirsch criticizes the viewpoints presented in the handbook Digital_Humanities, which takes the position that the digital humanities represent a complete paradigm shift in the ways we think about human culture. Instead of subscribing to this belief, Kirsch takes the position that the digital humanities itself is an ill-defined discipline, suffering from an acute identity crisis which prevents humanists from fully embracing it. Kirsch challenges whether the digital humanities should embrace technical methods of performing humanistic work, which he argues “tells us what we already know rather than leading us in new directions” (9). The fact that Kirsch is challenging the nature of the importance of findings derived from digital methods implies that Kirsch is not convinced that the digital humanities should be given as much attention as it has been over the past few years.

Aside from critiquing the mere definitional foundations of the digital humanities, Kirsch also calls into question whether a unique skillset should be required to engage in this discipline. He asks whether the nature of humanistic work is consonant with learning technical skills like coding, for example, or whether there should be a distinct separation between technical specialists and humanists. He inquires on page 6: “Is it practical for a humanities curriculum that can already stretch for ten years or more … to be expanded to include programming skills,” implying that he does not favor the idea of implementing technical knowledge acquisition into the traditional humanities.

Some key questions that Kirsch’s article raised, in my mind, were related to whether or not the question of digital integration is even one that can be feasibly raised. In a world where digital tools have become the de facto standard for nearly every manner of communication, is it even feasible to maintain a distinct separation between the work of humanists and the employment of digital tools? And, for that matter, as culture is increasingly digitized, will it even be possible to maintain such a separation down the line? I would certainly be curious to hear Kirsch’s response to these questions, as I feel as though the digital humanities represents an inevitable shift in the focus of humanities that occurred in response to the rapid reliance of modern society on digital tools. 
